Earthshot is a non-profit organization that is using video games and immersive experiences to inspire people to take action on climate change.
Earthshot believes that the current messaging on climate change is not working. Most climate messaging has been about its negative consequences on a large geographic scale. This approach isn’t moving enough people to take the action that’s needed now.
Earthshot believes that people will act once they see how climate change will impact their communities, affect them personally and once they know what they can do to reduce those impacts. Earthshot believes that actions are motivated best by simple, positive and empowering messages. Those messages can be exciting – displaying innovative, clean technology often more powerful or more effective and less costly than what is in use now. And the messages can be connective– enabling people to meet others in their community or shared interest groups and facilitate a powerful social movement.
Earthshot is creating innovative games people will want to play, where they will experience new technologies and their exciting opportunities, and see how their own actions tackling climate change can improve their quality of life - today. Earthshot believes that games can move people to action by making participation economically rewarding, for example, through retail rewards for qualifying actions. Or by providing the gratification of constructive competition towards a common goal, similar to participation in charity auctions.
Earthshot is looking for collaborators, sponsors and partners to help achieve its goals. If you are interested in learning more about Earthshot or getting involved, please visit their website: https://www.earthshot.us/
Earthshot was founded by Bob Wyman and Mark Bernstein, two friends and collaborators who have been working together on cleantech projects for over a decade.
Bob Wyman
Retired partner at Latham & Watkins LLP, where he served as Global Chair of its Environment, Land & Resources Department and Global Co-Chair of its Air Quality and Climate Practice Group.
Longest-serving member of the Congressionally-established Clean Air Act Advisory Committee.
Crafted several innovative approaches to reducing environmental impacts, including the use of market instruments and other regulatory tools to accelerate and monetize clean energy and transportation technologies.
Mark Bernstein
Pioneering leader in developing ideas, policies, and technologies for improving sustainability.
Held influential positions in various organizations, from government, academic, and finance.
Spent years considering and developing approaches to affect consumer behavior from energy efficiency to recycling to sustainability choices.
Earthshot's mission
To inspire people to take action on climate change by creating positive, educational, and engaging experiences.
To do this, Earthshot is developing a series of games and immersive experiences that will allow people to experience the impact of climate change firsthand and learn about the solutions that are available.
Earthshot's team
Bob Wyman and Mark Bernstein are the co-founders of Earthshot.
The team also includes Rob Legato, a triple Academy Award winner in visual effects, and Magnopus, experts in visual and augmented reality and multi-platform interaction.
Earthshot's impact
Earthshot is still in its early stages, but the team is already making a difference.
They have received funding from the Rockefeller Foundation and the Skoll Foundation, and they have been featured in publications such as The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal.
Earthshot is poised to make a significant impact on the fight against climate change, and they are excited to see what the future holds.
Current climate change messaging is not working.
People are more likely to act when they see a positive vision of the future.
Earthshot is a non-profit organization that is using games and immersive experiences to inspire people to take action on climate change.
Earthshot believes that games are a powerful way to engage people and teach them about climate change.
Earthshot is currently developing a series of games that will be released in 2023.
Earthshot is looking for partners to help them reach a wider audience.
Here are some additional details from the text:
Earthshot believes that the current climate change messaging is not working because it is too focused on the negative consequences of climate change.
Earthshot believes that people are more likely to act when they see a positive vision of the future.
Earthshot is using games and immersive experiences to create a positive vision of the future that will inspire people to take action on climate change.
Earthshot believes that games are a powerful way to engage people because they are fun, interactive, and educational.
Earthshot is currently developing a series of games that will be released in 2023.
Earthshot is looking for partners to help them reach a wider audience.
Earthshot is a non-profit organization that is using games and immersive experiences to inspire people to take action on climate change. The organization has a board of directors that includes experts in the entertainment, gaming, climate policy, sustainability, and technology industries. Earthshot is currently developing a series of hand-held games, as well as other initiatives such as podcasts, a technology showcase, and public relations and social networking campaigns. In the long term, Earthshot plans to develop museum-quality interactive and immersive experiences for museums, county fairs, and schools.
Here are some of the specific initiatives that Earthshot is working on:
Hand-held games: Earthshot is currently working on a series of hand-held games that will be used to educate people about climate change and inspire them to take action. The games will be available on a variety of platforms, including smartphones, tablets, and gaming consoles.
Earthshot Now podcasts: Earthshot Now is a podcast series that features interviews with celebrities, athletes, scientists, technologists, policymakers, and thought leaders about climate change. The podcast is available on a variety of platforms, including Spotify, Apple Podcasts, and Google Podcasts.
Technology showcase: Earthshot is co-hosting a technology showcase with John Preston, a former Director of Technology Development at MIT. The showcase will feature discussions about zero- and low-carbon technology options that are currently available for US infrastructure projects.
Public relations and social networking: SamsonPR is providing Earthshot with a public relations plan to activate social, digital, and print media. The plan will position Earthshot as a thought leader in the fight against climate change.
Cleantech platform for existing game franchises: Earthshot is exploring the possibility of developing cleantech platforms that could be used by existing game franchises. For example, Earthshot could develop an electric car platform that could be an add-on to existing racing games such as Gran Turismo or Microsoft Forza.
Character and narrative intellectual property: With sufficient funding, Earthshot intends to develop its own characters and narratives for possible use in one or more of its games and experiences.
Museum-quality interactive and immersive experiences: As envisioned prior to COVID, Earthshot plans to develop museum-quality interactive and immersive experiences for museums, county fairs, and schools. These multi-platform experiences would engage participants in individual and team-oriented problem solving that demonstrates both the personal impact of climate change and the prospects for using exciting cleantech to decarbonize the economy.
Norah's Arc: Earthshot may have the opportunity to work with a new film studio on the production of a film that has as its focus a multi-player game, in which players build their own wild animal park. In the story, the female lead character strives to save the world from a future in which there are no wild animals. Earthshot would help with game development and advise on environmental aspects of the film and game.
Earthshot is a unique and innovative organization that is using games and immersive experiences to inspire people to take action on climate change. The organization has a strong team of experts and is working on a variety of initiatives that have the potential to make a real difference.
Racial and Gender Equity and Partnerships with Disadvantaged Communities
Earthshot is committed to addressing climate change in a way that is equitable and inclusive. The organization is working to ensure that its products and initiatives are designed with the input of diverse communities, and that they benefit all people, regardless of their race, gender, or socioeconomic status.
Earthshot is already working with a number of organizations to promote racial and gender equity in the fight against climate change. For example, the organization is partnering with First Star, a national nonprofit that improves the lives of foster youth, to develop a game that will teach foster youth about climate change. Earthshot is also working with Black Girls CODE, a nonprofit that teaches girls of color to code, to offer a game design clinic at its upcoming summer camp program.
Financial Condition
Earthshot is a non-profit organization that is funded through a combination of in-kind contributions, individual donations, and grants. The organization has received significant in-kind contributions from a wide range of technology firms, programmers, game developers, and legal and professional service advisors. Earthshot has also received individual donations from approximately 40% of the approximately 120 people who have been contacted for this purpose.
Earthshot is building a significantly larger mailing list in preparation for an additional individual fundraising effort later this year. The organization is also seeking grants from foundations and other organizations that are interested in supporting its work.
Cleantech is cool and what to expect in 2023
The cleantech industry is growing rapidly, and there is a lot of excitement about the potential of new technologies to address climate change. In 2023, we can expect to see continued innovation in a number of areas, including:
Carbon removal
There is a growing focus on developing technologies that can remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. This is essential if we are to achieve net-zero emissions and mitigate the worst effects of climate change.
Cultured protein
Lab-grown meat is becoming increasingly viable, and it has the potential to reduce our reliance on traditional livestock production. This could have a major impact on greenhouse gas emissions, as well as on animal welfare.
Net zero energy homes
Net zero energy homes are designed to produce as much energy as they consume. This is achieved through a combination of energy efficiency measures and renewable energy technologies. Net zero energy homes can help to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and lower our energy bills.
Renewable Africa
Africa has a huge potential for renewable energy, and there is a growing movement to develop this potential. This could help to reduce Africa's dependence on imported oil and improve energy access for millions of people.
Crypto, Blockchain and AI oh my–can we green it up?
The cryptocurrency and blockchain industries are growing rapidly, but they also have a significant environmental impact. There is a growing movement to develop more sustainable ways to use these technologies. This could involve using renewable energy to power cryptocurrency mining, or developing blockchain-based systems that are more efficient and less resource-intensive.
Overall, the cleantech industry is poised for continued growth in 2023. With new technologies emerging all the time, there is a real opportunity to make significant progress in the fight against climate change.
Cultured Protein
Cultured protein, also known as lab-grown meat, is a new type of meat that is made from animal cells that are grown in a lab. This type of meat has the potential to reduce our reliance on traditional livestock production, which is a major contributor to greenhouse gas emissions.
In 2021, there were a number of breakthroughs in the development of cultured protein. Israeli start-up Redefine Meat pulled off the world's largest blind taste test for its 3D printed cultured meat alternative. The taste test targeted meat-eaters and the results were in. Over 90% of the tasters liked it.
Other companies are also working on developing cultured protein. Upside Foods opened a facility in California to grow cells into meat, Mosa Meat announced it made breakthroughs in their technology and Wildtype has developed a new, cell-based salmon product.
These companies are still in the early stages of development, but they have the potential to revolutionize the way we eat meat. Cultured protein could help us to reduce our environmental impact and improve our health.
Net Zero Energy Homes
A net zero energy home is a home that produces as much energy as it consumes. This is achieved through a combination of energy efficiency measures and renewable energy technologies. Net zero energy homes can help to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and lower our energy bills.
There are a number of ways to build a net zero energy home. One way is to use modular construction. Modular homes are built in factories and then shipped to the site where they are assembled. Modular homes are often more energy efficient than traditional stick-built homes.
Another way to build a net zero energy home is to use 3D printing. 3D printed homes can be built quickly and efficiently, and they can be designed to be highly energy efficient.
Net zero energy homes are becoming more and more popular. As the cost of renewable energy technologies continues to fall, the cost of building a net zero energy home is also falling. In the near future, net zero energy homes may become the norm.
Overall, the text you provided discusses two emerging technologies that have the potential to make a significant impact on the environment. Cultured protein could help us to reduce our reliance on traditional livestock production, and net zero energy homes could help us to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels. Both of these technologies are still in the early stages of development, but they have the potential to revolutionize the way we live.
Renewable Africa
Africa is one of the world's poorest continents, and it is also one of the most energy-poor. Over 760 million people in Africa do not have access to electricity, and this number is increasing. The traditional way to electrify Africa is to build power plants and string power lines across long distances. However, this is expensive and time-consuming, and it is not always feasible in rural areas.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in decentralized renewable energy solutions for Africa. These solutions include solar panels, wind turbines, and microgrids. Decentralized renewable energy solutions are more affordable and efficient than traditional power plants, and they can be deployed quickly and easily in rural areas.
There are a number of organizations working to promote decentralized renewable energy solutions in Africa. One of these organizations is Africa MDB. Africa MDB is a non-profit organization that provides loans and grants to businesses and governments that are working to deploy renewable energy solutions in Africa.
Crypto, Blockchain and AI oh my
The rise of cryptocurrencies, blockchain technology, and artificial intelligence (AI) is having a major impact on the environment. Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum use a lot of energy to process transactions. Blockchain technology, which is the underlying technology behind cryptocurrencies, also uses a lot of energy. And AI, which is used in a wide variety of applications, including machine learning and deep learning, can also be energy-intensive.
The environmental impact of these technologies is a growing concern. In fact, some experts believe that the rise of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology could actually make climate change worse.
There are a number of things that can be done to reduce the environmental impact of these technologies. One is to use renewable energy sources to power them. Another is to develop more efficient ways to use them. And finally, we need to raise awareness of the environmental impact of these technologies and encourage people to use them responsibly.
Earthshot
Earthshot is a non-profit organization that was founded to inspire people to take an active role in combatting climate change through video games and compelling immersive experiences offering a powerful, positive, cleantech message.
Earthshot believes that video games can be a powerful tool for education and advocacy. By creating games that are both fun and educational, Earthshot hopes to inspire people to learn more about climate change and take action to address it.
Earthshot is currently developing two initial game concepts. The first is a car-based adventure game called Electro Venture. The goal of Electro Venture is to get players excited about electric vehicles. The second game concept is a city-building game called Green City. The goal of Green City is to teach players about the importance of sustainability and how to build a more sustainable city.
Earthshot is still in its early stages, but it has a big vision. The organization hopes to create a movement of gamers who are passionate about climate change and who are committed to taking action to address it.
Overall, the text you provided discusses a number of emerging technologies that have the potential to make a significant impact on the environment. These technologies include cultured protein, net zero energy homes, renewable energy in Africa, and decentralized renewable energy solutions. While these technologies are still in the early stages of development, they have the potential to revolutionize the way we live and work.
SuperCharged is a comic book series that follows the adventures of Cara Quintana and Jack Wilson as they race across the country to protect Cara's super-battery invention from the hands of their mysterious enemy. Along the way, they must evade pursuers, real and imagined, including foreign agents, rogue military contractors, tech competitors, and others.
The series is set in the near future, and it explores the themes of climate change, sustainability, and the future of transportation. It is also a love story, as Cara and Jack slowly fall in love as they travel together.
The series is written by Sally Krueger-Wyman and Bob Wyman, and it is illustrated by Jim and Ruth Keegan and Mark Schultz. It is scheduled to be released in 12 issues, beginning in 2023.
Swapping Out Old AC Units: One Piece of a Robust Energy Solution for California
California faces a number of energy challenges, including climate change, extreme heat, strain on the electric grid, spiking natural gas prices, and the burden higher energy prices place on California's most vulnerable communities. In the past year, these challenges have intensified in the form of record high temperatures last summer and soaring natural gas prices early in 2023. The State has developed several innovative tools for addressing these challenges, but one tool that still does not receive enough attention is energy efficiency.
The authors of the white paper "Swapping Out Old AC Units: One Piece of a Robust Energy Solution for California" propose that an efficiency program swapping out old window air conditioners (AC) for new ones would meaningfully reduce energy demand, strain on the grid, and energy burden, and that such a program would serve as a model for other efficiency programs. For the counties covered by Southern California Edison and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, replacing a quarter of a million window AC units the program could save up to 100 gWh and $26 million per year and displace 60 MW of natural gas generation running at 20% capacity, which is significantly cheaper than the cost of peak power.
The white paper argues that the program would be cost-effective and would have a number of benefits, including:
Reduced energy demand, which would help to reduce strain on the electric grid and make the grid more reliable.
Reduced natural gas consumption, which would help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution.
Reduced energy burden, which would help to make energy more affordable for low- and moderate-income households.
Improved public health, by reducing the number of heat-related illnesses and deaths.
The white paper concludes by calling on the California legislature to fund the program and to make it a priority.
California is facing a crisis of electricity shortfall risks.
The Governor's California budget includes billions to extend the life of some natural gas power plants, build new ones and even invest in some emergency diesel generation.
This is not the best, cheapest, or fastest way to reduce the risk of blackouts.
A better solution is to avoid the high demand altogether and bring forward a better solution.
While CA has led the nation in energy efficiency, the fact is, most buildings in the state still have older and inefficient energy-using equipment – especially in lower-income communities and small commercial businesses.
Small commercial buildings make up 94% of all commercial buildings in the U.S but are largely underserved by efficiency programs.
In a recent report, ACEEE stated that comprehensive retrofits of commercial buildings could achieve up to a 40% reduction in energy consumption.
We don’t need anywhere near that impressive number to solve our near-term challenge – easy changes can reduce energy demand by 10-15% quicker and cheaper than any of the energy supply side (fossil fuel) options.
These include lighting retrofits and the installation of new sensors and building energy management systems, and even sealing ductwork so cooling and heating are not wasted.
Add in some strategically-placed solar and battery systems and you have solved the bulk of the problem.
A state strategic energy-efficiency upgrade is the answer.
It is not just commercial buildings that can help solve the problem.
Lower-income households receive low-quality energy services.
They tend to live in older buildings with little or poor insulation, air leaks around doors and windows, cracked walls or roofs, and older and more inefficient air conditioners and other equipment.
A 20-year-old air conditioner, hardly uncommon, uses at least 4 times more energy than a new one and doesn’t cool as well either.
On a hot day, these residents spend lots of money on electricity yet still have a hard time living in comfortable conditions.
Running an inefficient air-conditioner on a hundred-plus-degree day, they may find it hard to get the indoor temperature below 85 degrees.
This has wide-ranging consequences.
The elderly are particularly vulnerable to these conditions, while children often suffer from asthma, particularly if they lack a stable temperature and proper ventilation.
Underserved vulnerable individuals often end up in emergency rooms, missing school or work days.
Overall, insufficient household energy has been linked to excess deaths in summer; cardiovascular, pulmonary, and respiratory problems; poor sleep, anxiety, depression, and stress.
The City of Los Angeles has recognized the problem by creating a new position: Chief Heat Officer whose job is to help find ways to reduce the heat burden on the communities that are most vulnerable.
Numerous health and environmental studies confirm the material net economic and social benefits of addressing these problems.
Rather than spending a billion dollars on new natural gas-generating equipment, let’s use it to replace older air conditioners with new ones, seal up windows and improve insulation, and replace old light bulbs with new LEDs for every household in California that needs it.
And if we want electric utilities to do it too - how about we let them earn a rate of return on replacing millions of inefficient air conditioners - instead of earning a return on building new power plants.
The benefits would be enormous.
Will this solve the problem? You bet it will, we can shave 10-20% off existing energy demand and prevent blackouts.
I recognize that ramping up quickly will cause some supply headaches – we all know about the supply chain issues we have all been facing.
However, there are plenty of LED lights and new air conditioners available now to get started.
While we are getting started– if the state is planning to buy a large number of air conditioners, we can provide a tax break to any air conditioner manufacturer willing to set up shop in California and guarantee purchases at a negotiated volume and price for a fixed time period while expediting permitting processes and creating new jobs.
If you want to see hundreds of cool and innovative technologies that can be used to help achieve these savings – check out Earthshot’s Cleantech is Cool Portal for Building Solutions
