There’s only one spaceship earth, and your mission as a player and participant is to help save it. That’s the goal of Earthshot™, a non-profit founded to inspire people to take an active role in combating climate change through video games and compelling immersive experiences offering a powerful, positive, cleantech message. 

We are developing video games and experiences that have a uniquely effective messaging platform: cleantech is cool and exciting! Evoking a level of excitement akin to the ‘moonshot’ - the Apollo mission’s race to the moon - a new generation of dreamers, inventors, and everyone else - are subtly recruited to help save spaceship Earth. 

Our games, add-ons to existing games, and experiences will be fun and engaging for all different players. From racing games, to role-playing and third person shooter games, gamers will want to play for fun, but then for the planet too. While participating in the mission, individual competitive gamers will come to realize they can take action to solve climate change – and this will empower them to do more.

To help achieve this goal, Earthshot is looking for like-minded collaborators to help us build the games and experiences, as well as sponsors, and partners, so that the solutions to climate change are implemented now.
 
 
Earthshot™ is a 501c3 non-profit inspiring people to take action on climate change through exciting video games and compelling immersive experiences that will deliver a positive, cleantech oriented empowering message. Evoking the excitement of one of humanity’s most ambitious technological challenges – the race to the moon, today we are in a race to inspire a new generation of dreamers, inventors, and everyone else to help save spaceship Earth. We are taking this approach because the current messaging isn’t working – almost half the country doesn’t believe climate change will impact them. Games and immersive experiences are a uniquely effective messaging platform with games having viewership exceeding 3 billion hours per week. We are going to replace this thinking: Climate change won’t impact me, and I can’t do anything about it anyway, with this: Clean technology is innovative and exciting, and I’m taking action to solve climate change. To achieve our goals, we are looking for collaborators, sponsors and partners.

Changing the Message and the Messenger on Climate Change
 
 
Climate change is real.  It is here in an unprecedented frequency and strength of floods, droughts, wildfires, heatwaves and hurricanes.   Why aren’t mor people prompted to action?   Several reasons:  for many, the threat seems too far in the future or too geographically distant.  Only 43% of people in a recent Resources for the Future (RFF) poll said that their own county’s weather patterns seemed more unstable in recent years.  A recent Yale University poll produced a similar result, indicating that almost half of Americans (47%) believe that global warming will not harm them or if it does, it will be ‘just a little.’ In short, a large portion of the population still does not see climate change as a clear, personal threat.
 
Those who do feel it’s a personal threat may feel powerless to act. They may view the scale and complexity of action as overwhelming.  Or wonder if their individual actions could make a difference.  Many may believe climate solutions to be too costly, lower performing or otherwise objectionable.
 
 
We can send a better message 
 
Most climate messaging has been about its negative consequences on a large geographic scale.  This  approach isn’t moving enough people to take the action that’s needed now.  However, we believe people will act once they see how climate change will impact their communities, affect them personally and once they know what they can to reduce those impacts.  Actions are motivated best by simple, positive and empowering messages. Those messages can be exciting – displaying innovative, clean technology often more powerful or more effective and less costly than what is in use now.  And the messages can be connective– enabling people to meet others in their community or shared interest groups and facilitate a powerful social movement. 
 
The messenger is important. We are often motivated by people we trust as well as media such as  TV, movies, YouTube and games.  Games can move people to action by making participation economically rewarding, for example, through retail rewards for qualifying actions.  Or by providing the gratification of constructive competition towards a common goal, similar to participation in charity auctions.
 
 
We have work to do
 
Recent polling shows that a significant portion of the US population (over 40%) doesn’t believe climate change will harm them during the next 25 years and more than a quarter (28%) believe that it will actually benefit them.  Though there are regional differences in these perspectives, the people who don’t believe global warming will harm them are dispersed across the country, with a few hotspots. [Not sure what this means; suggest clarifying or cutting – and I’d cut.]   The map below shows the percent of Americans who believe global warming will harm them personally by congressional district. There are few counties in which more than 50% of the population believes that global warming will harm them and there are many more in which less than 40% believe it will harm them.
 
There are many congressional districts where less than 40% of the people don’t believe global warming will harm them. There are 145 congressional districts and 28 states [and 28 states or in 28 states?] that fall below 40%.  Although these districts and states represent less than 25% of the U.S. population, they hold one-third of the seats in the House of Representatives and elect 56 of the 100 Senators. If people don’t believe climate change will harm them, they won’t take action, nor will they pressure their elected representatives to do anything.  [Charts are blurry; have same titles; can’t tell county v congress]
 
We need a different approach to get the word out if we are to change attitudes. This is Earthshot’sTM core mission – and we see video games as the new, best messenger.  Over 65% of American adults say they play video games [source?]  The current number is likely higher since  COVID drove much of life indoors. Gaming spans all age groups - from gen-Zrs to baby boomers. People can take away many different messages from playing games.  Earthshot is creating innovative games people will want to play, where they will experience new technologies and their exciting opportunities, and see how their own actions tackling climate change can improve their quality of life - today.
 
Join us at EarthshotTM as we inspire people to act. https://www.earthshot.us/
 
Some fun reading
 
Rachel Becker. Why scare tactics won't stop climate change: Doomsday scenarios don’t inspire action, The Verge, Jul 11, 2017
https://www.theverge.com/2017/7/11/15954106/doomsday-climate-science-apocalypse-new-york-magazine-response
 
P.S. Hart, and Lauren Feldman. Threat without efficacy? Climate change on US network news. Sci. Commun. 36, 2014
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1075547013520239
 
Jennifer Marlon, Brittany Bloodhart, Matthew Ballew, Justin Rolfe-Redding, Connie Roser-Renouf, Anthony Leiserowitz & Edward Maibach. How Hope and Doubt Affect Climate Change Mobilization, Front. Commun., 21 May 2019 https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcomm.2019.00020/full
 
Saffron O’Neill and Sophie Nicholson-Cole. Fear Won't Do It”: Promoting Positive Engagement With Climate Change Through Visual and Iconic Representations, Sci. Commun. 30, 2009
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1075547008329201
 
Diane Osgood and Daniel Aronson. Do consumers reward companies for their climate leadership?, Greenbiz.com, August 2020
https://www.greenbiz.com/article/do-consumers-reward-companies-their-climate-leadership
 
Adele Peters. 5 Ways To Convince People To Actually Do Something About Climate Change
Fast Company, August 2015
 
Pew Research Center, 2018
 
Resources for the Future poll
 
Elke Weber. Experience-Based and Description-Based Perceptions of Long-Term Risk: Why Global Warming does not Scare us (Yet). Climatic Change 77, 2006. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10584-006-9060-3
 
Yale University poll

FOUNDERS STORY
 
EarthshotTM was founded by Bob Wyman and Mark Bernstein. Bob and Mark have been friends and collaborators for more than a decade, having worked together on several exciting cleantech projects.
 
At the end of 2019, Bob retired from Latham & Watkins LLP, where he was a partner for 32 years and served, among other roles, as Global Chair of its Environment, Land & Resources Department and Global Co-Chair of its Air Quality and Climate Practice Group. During his career at Latham, Bob was also the longest-serving member of the Congressionally-established Clean Air Act Advisory Committee, serving for 23 of the past 29 years. As an environmental policy advocate, Bob crafted several innovative approaches to reducing environmental impacts, including the use of market instruments and other regulatory tools to accelerate and monetize clean energy and transportation technologies.
 
As he approached retirement, Bob’s spouse, psychologist and poet, Dr. Lisa C. Krueger, encouraged him to address the unfinished business of tackling climate change. They had often discussed educational approaches that illustrated personal impacts and highlighted the power of consumer choice. Bob naturally thought of Mark, his friend and sustainability expert, as the ideal collaborator to lead such a venture. 
 
Mark Bernstein has been a pioneering leader in developing ideas, policies and technologies for improving sustainability. Mark has held influential positions in various organizations, from government, academic and finance and has spent years considering and developing approaches to affect consumer behavior from energy efficiency to recycling to sustainability choices.
 
Bob and Mark decided to collaborate on a project that would draw from their mutual expertise, initially focused on Bob’s idea to create positive and educational interactive experiences along the lines of H.G. Wells’ science fiction story, The Time Machine. Participants seated in a control pod would hurtle forward in time to witness climate impacts tailored to their home region. Returning to the present they would be able to choose paths forward by turning control dials reflecting energy, transportation and land use choices and view first-hand how smart decisions can both enhance their lives and protect the planet.
 
They evaluated existing programs around the world related to the personal engagement challenge – how to get people excited about new technologies and to understand what they can do to reduce their carbon footprint with concepts that are contemporary and interesting.
 
Key to the success of any educational experience would be its visual quality and interactivity. Bob reached out to his good friend Rob Legato. Rob is a triple Academy Award winner in visual effects. From his extraordinary achievements in perspective in such movies as Titanic and Hugo to his use of virtual imaging and filming in Jungle Book and Lion King, Rob brings an understanding of visual story-telling perfect for the EarthshotTM approach. Rob brought along one of his technology partners, Magnopus, experts in visual and augmented reality and multi-platform interaction, and the ideas for EarthshotTM started to take shape. This small creative team began to conceptualize a personal, immersive and entertaining experience for museum and mobile platforms that would convey positive messages, stimulate thought, encourage dialogue and propel constructive action.
 
During this period, Bob and Mark reached out to many other friends who are among the best and the brightest in the necessary fields of expertise, including Joe Goffman (Harvard), Vickie Patton (EDF), Mike Vandenbergh (Vanderbilt), Manny Grace (Disney), Ann Carlson (UCLA), Clayton Munnings (IETA), Sean Watson (Strategy Consultant), Tom Lloyd (Capital Group), Cynthia Ringo (DBL Partners) and Nikki Buffa (Latham). Together with Rob Legato, they formed the founding Board of Directors.  New Directors Belinda Walker (Girls & Gangs, New Village Girls Academy), Lauren Graham (Velvet Frame), Nikhil Jain (Serial Entrepreneur) and soon-to-be-inducted Jamar Graham (Unity Ads) add important community and gaming industry experience.
.
Our company name, EarthshotTM, conveys the collective excitement and technological achievement of the Apollo moon shot. Our plan was to start with in-person immersive experiences with Oculus-type headsets, taking the program on the road to museums, county fairs and schools around the country. We would then build out the experience into a multi-player online game. When COVID changed the opportunity for in-person experiences, we flipped the script to focus on hand-held games with the plan to develop in-person experiences at a later date. We have an incredible board and, while continuing to build our team and broaden our partnerships, we are gearing up to build our first game!
 
 
Where is the climate change sizzle?
 
The release of the latest IPCC report is a stark reminder that current climate messaging has a real problem.  Despite constant news reporting, only about half of U.S. adults who responded to recent polling say that they believe global warming will hurt them personally and only about 25% consider climate change personally important.
 
Achieving significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions will need action by a majority of people – for both personal and political reasons. Consumer support is essential to rapidly deploying new clean technologies and to making more sustainable choices. Public opinion is also important because it can influence government policy. If people believe climate change threatens them, they are more likely to urge politicians to act. Yet Yale University’s Climate Opinion Survey shows that in more than half of Congressional districts (over 230) and in half of the states (25), a majority of constituents don’t perceive a climate crisis.  In these jurisdictions there is little constituent pressure. Notwithstanding some slight convergence due to recent targeted messaging campaigns, American opinion remains highly polarized. The current messaging is not sufficiently moving the needle on either consumer choice or public opinion.
 
More than a decade ago, UC Berkeley researchers suggested that we need an alternative to only communicating the threat of climate change. Yet headlines like, “Only 10 years left to avoid climate emergency” and “It’s too late” persist as the primary message, Threat rhetoric triggers for many a feeling of hopelessness or even aversion, particularly if remedies are perceived as disruptive to one’s lifestyle.  Threatening information can lead people to become defensive towards the message and the messenger instead of to the threat itself. Climate threat messages are important, but the results show us that they alone are not sufficient.  Yes, we need a sense of urgency, but we also need hope. If people don’t have hope for the future, why bother trying to change it?
 
From the 1930’s through the 1950’s Elmer Wheeler was the country’s ‘master wordsmith.’  Some say he was the #1 salesperson. His first principle of selling is “Don’t sell the steak, sell the sizzle.’ It’s the sizzle of the steak on the grill that captures the imagination; or it’s the crunch of a cracker or the whiff of the coffee that inspires people to buy the products. For years we’ve tried selling climate change, and a lot of people just aren’t buying. If climate change is the steak, where is the sizzle?
 
It can be found in existing and emerging clean technologies. We want to capture the imagination and tap into a sense of progress and excitement about the future. Simply stated, cleantech is cool, whether we are talking electric cars accelerating faster, or electric pickup trucks pulling heavier loads, doing tank turns and crabwalks, or inexpensive solar and wind technologies. It is also plant-based meats that are tastier, regenerative agriculture that grows food while storing carbon, and quiet and efficient electric airplanes. As people learn about available technologies that are cheaper and better than what we have today, they will be inclined to try something different.
 
At Earthshot, a non-profit, we present a positive vision of the future focusing on exciting new cleantech using immersive experiences and video games to inspire and empower people to act in the battle against climate change. The current approach is not working; so, in the memorable phrasing of Monty Python – And Now for Something Completely Different.
 
     I.     	Introduction to Earthshot
Earthshot is developing positive, cleantech-oriented games and experiences that will immerse people in role-playing as a uniquely effective messaging platform with the reach and impact to shift perception on climate change.  The name “Earthshot” evokes the excitement of one of humanity’s most ambitious technology challenges – the Apollo Moon Landing – now focused on inspiring a new generation to save our own planet.
   II.     	Background and The Challenge
Current climate change messaging is widely regarded as ineffective.  Fearful messaging often paralyzes people into inaction.  Climate change often also seems distant in time or location.  People also believe the scale of the challenge and its remedies are overwhelming, beyond an individual’s capacity to impact.  As reported in the recent Yale University poll, almost 50% of the US population does not believe climate change will affect them personally.  Indeed almost 28% believe that climate change will actually help them. There is frequently a misperception that a successful strategy for stabilizing the climate will require personal sacrifice and that technological choices will be expensive and inconvenient (so-called solution aversion).
These paralyzing and negative perceptions are untrue.  Climate change is in many respects real and immediate.  Most of the solutions are already or will very soon be available.  They are affordable; in many cases actually lower cost than the carbon-intensive technologies they will replace.  And they are overwhelmingly positive, exciting and life-enhancing to a degree that readily offsets short-term costs.
 III.     	Earthshot Mission
Earthshot’s mission is to inspire climate action through exciting interactive experiences that portray a positive vision of the future.  This vision is driven by the clean technologies and many energy, transportation and land use strategies (e.g., regenerative agriculture) that perform better, cost less and otherwise will enrich our lives.  Earthshot will use the very best communication techniques to personalize experiences – gaming, role-playing and multiple visual platforms such as enhanced, augmented and virtual reality – designed to implement Benjamin Franklin’s famous saying, “Tell me and I forget, teach me and I remember, involve me and I learn.”
Earthshot believes that such modern communication tools more fully engage the participant and stimulate the senses to deliver a positive, empowering and more enduring cleantech message to a diverse audience.  Communication experts have long recognized the teaching value of interactive and role-playing techniques.  With viewership exceeding 3 billion hours per week, modern-day gaming has the potential to use such techniques to reach a very large and diverse audience.  Pre-COVID gaming market analyses report that large portions of the public play some type of video game (65% of US adults), with the majority playing on smartphones.  The audience is gender-balanced (47% in the US are women) and relatively age-diverse (38% of US gamers are age 18-34).
Importantly, we intend to enhance the Earthshot experience with a substantial reward program by providing people with opportunities to take real-world actions that reduce their carbon footprint.  Players will have the opportunity to earn points in games for use both inside and outside the game, for such rewards as free LED lightbulbs, coupons for plant-based meats or environmentally-sensitive detergent, among other products. Together, the integrated games and reward program should significantly and beneficially impact consumer choice in ways we can track and evaluate.
 IV.     	History and Organization
Earthshot was founded in the summer of 2018 by Bob Wyman and Mark Bernstein.  Bob was approaching retirement from the law firm of Latham & Watkins LLP, having practiced environmental law there since 1981.  At Latham, Bob developed innovative policy programs that used economic incentives to monetize and stimulate the introduction of clean technologies.  Bob is the longest-serving member of the US Clean Air Act Advisory Committee (serving for 23 of its 29 years).  He has routinely received the highest legal practice rankings through 2020, including a prior Lawyer of the Decade designation by the National Law Journal as one of the three most impactful US attorneys in the areas of Environment and Energy.  Bob cofounded Earthshot to improve public support for addressing climate change by using advanced communication and role-playing tools with an empowering, cleantech-oriented message.  Bob currently serves as Board Chair.
Bob presented the concept to Mark, who agreed to serve as Earthshot President.  Mark has decades of public and private sector experience in the clean energy, environment and sustainability space, having worked at the Clinton White House on climate change technology strategies, at RAND where he conducted cutting-edge policy research on renewables and efficiency and helped found the USC Energy Institute.  Mark has recently served as an advisor to numerous cleantech startups, from electric airplanes to recycling rare-earth magnets and hemp-based building insulation. 

a. 	Earthshot Board and Advisers
Earthshot has an expert Board designed to shepherd its unique approach.  Its members include:
·  	a triple Academy Award winner for visual effects:
o   Rob Legato (Titanic, Hugo and Jungle Book; filmed The Lion King entirely in virtual reality)
·  	other entertainment and gaming industry experts:
o   Jamar Graham (Partner Manager, Unity Technologies)
o   Glen Trotiner (Assistant Movie Director, Burnside Entertainment)
·  	climate policy experts:
o   Nikki Buffa (Counsel, Latham & Watkins LLP; former Obama Administration official at the White House CEQ and the Department of Interior)
o   Vickie Patton (Counsel, EDF)
o   Mike Vandenbergh (Vanderbilt Law School; prolific writer on voluntary corporate climate action and the behavioral climate wedge)
 
·  	a community education and public service expert:
o   Belinda Smith Walker (founding Board Member of the Los Angeles Women’s Foundation, cofounder of both Girls & Gangs and the New Village Girls Academy)
·  	sustainability experts:
o   Manny Grace (Associate General Counsel, The Walt Disney Company)
o   Lauren Graham (founder and CEO of sustainability and social change firm, Velvet Frame)
·  	an environmental economist:
o   Clayton Munnings (West Coast representative for the International Emissions Trading Association (IETA)
·  	cleantech industry experts:
o   John Preston (Managing Director, TEM Capital; former MIT Director of Technology Development)
o   Cynthia Ringo (Managing Director, DBL Investors)
o   Tom Lloyd (Senior Vice President, Capital Group);
·  	an expert in artificial intelligence:
o   Nikhil Jain (cofounder of Oben, Inc.; serial entrepreneur)
·  	an innovation strategist:
o   Sean Watson
Earthshot benefits from advice from and consultation and collaboration with several other entities and organizations, including Magnopus, also an Academy Award winner as a multi-platform art and immersive technology company; HitPoint Studios, a gaming and education entity; Bop Network, a gaming development company; Lanier, a programming and artificial intelligence technology firm; and SamsonPR, a public relations firm.
Latham & Watkins LLP has provided Earthshot with significant pro bono legal services in the areas of corporate formation, tax, trademark, insurance, environmental policy and employment.
b.	Officers and Staff
Mark Bernstein currently serves as President of Earthshot and as an ex-Officio member of the Board.  Mark is assisted by two volunteer staff members, Tyler Honaker (Treasurer) and Jon Gordon (Secretary).
As outlined in the attached estimated budget, Earthshot is seeking the resources for several key staff members, including a Chief Operations Officer and a Development Director, among potential staff additions.
c. 	Other Volunteers
Earthshot currently benefits from the volunteer services of several other talented individuals in the areas of game design and development, social networking and public relations.
   V.     	Initiatives Under Development
Earthshot is in the process of developing several products and experiences.  At present, this work is being conducted exclusively through volunteer services by interested persons and entities with an interest in Earthshot’s mission.  These volunteers include artists, gaming companies, game designers, coders, legal service providers, artificial intelligence technologists and multi-platform (e.g., real, enhanced, augmented and virtual reality) technology providers.  As noted more fully below, Earthshot is also partnering, or actively exploring collaborations, with various organizations dedicated to addressing gender and racial equity and disadvantaged communities.
a. 	Hand-Held Games
Earthshot’s volunteer team is currently working on the following conceptual hand-held games:
                                           	i. 	Racing Game – a Twitch-viewable team race over distances, overcoming natural and competitor-created obstacles.
                                         	ii. 	Multiplayer (third-person shooter-type) Game – Players change the map using special abilities that correlate to specific renewable energy or other clean technologies.  Changing environments may include melting ice, forest fires, earthquakes.  The game may include a variety of map views.
                                       	iii. 	The First Chef – our celebrity chef(s) is transported back in time and must cook for a village using only foraged ingredients.
                                        	iv. 	Fighting Robots – players build fighting robots whose powers vary according to individual stats built by using eco-friendly products.
                                         	v. 	Solo Driving Game – player moves along a route picking up valuable clean energy tokens while avoiding high-carbon obstacles and tokens.  Developed with Bop Games and derived from their existing simple driving game.  This simple game is designed to be used as a standalone game for fundraising events.
b.	Other Earthshot Initiatives
                                           	i. 	Earthshot Now Podcasts
Earthshot Now will produce engaging chats with a highly diverse set of guests, including celebrities and professional athletes, entertainment industry experts, scientists, technologists, policymakers and thought leaders to demonstrate the wide range of support for climate action.  We have already recorded ten episodes, including Terry Tamminen (former CalEPA Secretary), Dahntay Jones (retired NBA player), Ron Duprot (Top Chef contender), Jim Evanoff (retired Yellowstone National Park environment ranger) and Earthshot Board Member Rob Legato (triple Academy Award winner for visual effects).
                                         	ii. 	Technology Showcase
Earthshot is assisting Earthshot Board member John Preston (former Director of Technology Development at MIT) by cohosting a discussion among technology providers and academicians regarding zero- and low-carbon technology options that are currently available for US infrastructure projects.  This technology showcase is currently scheduled for May, 2021 at Arizona State University.  Conclusions and recommendations will be presented to the Biden Climate Task Force in June in Washington, DC.
                                       	iii. 	Public Relations and Social Networking
SamsonPR is providing Earthshot with a public relations plan to activate social, digital and print media and to position Earthshot in the forefront of thought leadership.
                                        	iv. 	Cleantech Platform for Existing Game Franchises
Earthshot may develop cleantech platforms that could be used by existing franchises, such as an electric car platform that could be an add-on to existing racing games such as Gran Turismo or Microsoft Forza.
                                         	v. 	Character and Narrative Intellectual Property
With sufficient funding, Earthshot intends to develop its own characters and narratives for possible use in one or more of its games and experiences.
c. 	Long-Term Earthshot Programs
As envisioned prior to COVID, Earthshot plans to develop museum-quality interactive and immersive experiences for museums, county fairs and schools.  These multi-platform experiences would engage participants in individual and team-oriented problem solving that demonstrates both the personal impact of climate change and the prospects for using exciting cleantech to decarbonize the economy.
d.	Norah’s Arc
We may have the opportunity to work with a new film studio on the production of a film that has as its focus a multi-player game, in which players build their own wild animal park. In the story, the female lead character strives to save the world from a future in which there are no wild animals. We would help with game development and advise on environmental aspects of the film and game.
 VI.     	Racial and Gender Equity and Partnerships with Disadvantaged Communities
As climate change disproportionately impacts the disadvantaged, prompt climate action will benefit many communities of priority concern.  Earthshot plans to augment this general benefit of climate education by using retail and in-game rewards that target impacted communities for accelerated pollution reduction and other benefits.
Earthshot is already engaging diverse teams of game designers to ensure that its products are designed with the very best input of those most impacted.  For example, Earthshot recently conducted a “game jam” (i.e., design charrette) with First Star, a national nonprofit that improves the lives of foster youth by providing academic instruction, life skills and adult support needed to navigate higher education and adulthood.  Earthshot invited eight current and former foster scholars, provided them with an introduction to climate change and ran a game jam to develop an Earthshot game.  The First Star team has designed the conceptual game described above as The First Chef.
With the assistance of Earthshot Board member Jamar Graham and LaRhonda (Ronnie) Frost of Frost STEAM Labs, Earthshot also is exploring collaboration with Black Girls CODE to offer an Earthshot game design clinic at its upcoming summer camp program.
VII.     	Financial Condition
a. 	In-Kind Contributions
Earthshot has benefited from substantial in-kind contributions from a wide range of technology firms, programmers, game developers, and legal and professional service advisors, as noted above. The total value of these voluntary contributions is in the range of $1.5 million to date.
b.	Individual Contributions
In addition, Earthshot undertook a small individual fundraising campaign in late December of last year, receiving individual contributions from approximately 40% of the approximately 120 people contacted for this purpose, in the total amount of $40,600.  Earthshot is building a significantly larger mailing list in preparation for an additional individual fundraising effort later this year.
c. 	Costs
Most of the initial startup costs (e.g., registrations, domain names, web services) have been covered by the Earthshot cofounders, with only approximately $16,000 expended from Earthshot funds for directors’ and officers’ insurance, general nonprofit legal advice; UK and EU legal trademark services and other similar expenses.

Cleantech is cool and what to expect in 2023
 
2023 saw lots of excitement in cleantech with the explosion of car companies announcing new electric vehicles. The year started with GM and Ford Super Bowl commercials for their EVs, followed with a continuing stream of announcements by car companies around the world. In 2021 we saw increasing improvements in the efficiency of batteries for vehicles, lots of talk about energy storage and further acceleration of solar energy. A new buzzword–net-zero carbon–was in vogue and as we moved to the climate summit in Glasgow there were major announcements by companies and governments about getting to net-zero carbon emissions. Also emerging big time in 2022 was concern about the energy use and large climate change impact of digital currency–in particular Bitcoin. Digital currency and the industry around it is booming, and it’s carbon footprint is large. We will be hearing more about it in 2023 for sure.
 
So what new can we expect to hear about in 2023? What will be the hot cleantech ideas, news stories and investments in 2023?
 
Here is my top 5 list:
●  	Carbon Removal–what it is and what to do with it
●  	Cultured Protein–lab grown meat
●  	Net Zero Energy Homes–building homes affordably, fast and efficient
●  	Renewable Africa–jumping to a new level of development
●  	Crypto, Blockchain and AI oh my–can we green it up?
 
 
Carbon Removal
 
We aren’t moving fast enough in reducing emissions to get us on a trend to mitigate the worst impacts of climate change. We know getting to net-zero carbon emissions is the key but given the outcome of the Glasgow meetings, that just won’t be enough to radically change the direction of the changing climate; we need to remove carbon from the air. The most talked about options are planting lots of trees and building up carbon in soil using techniques like regenerative agriculture. By 2030 we may need over 5 gigatons of carbon removal and trees and soils may not be enough. We need other carbon removal options. While some say that carbon removal is a distraction from reducing emissions, many believe it will be needed to get to negative carbon which is the ultimate goal to mitigate the worst impacts of climate change. My motto is that we need an ‘all of the above’ approach (well maybe not all of the above–I don’t think we need geoengineering projects like cloud seeding to reflect sunlight). One of the emerging carbon removal technologies I think will make waves in 2022 is called ‘direct air capture’ (DAC). It has the potential to be the fastest and easiest way to take CO2 out of the air and help reverse the worst effects of climate change. These DAC machines suck in surrounding air and then separate CO2 from oxygen and nitrogen that make up the bulk of the air we breathe. The CO2 is then stored as a compressed gas and either used to replace other sources of CO2 in things like carbonated beverages or is permanently stored underground.
 
The company Mechanical Trees has been working with this technology for years and they plan to deploy large scale commercial demonstration projects in 2022. These new projects will show the viability of the technologies and they are all on a path to creating cost-effective carbon removal. Investment will be heading their way. Some other companies include: https://carbonengineering.com/ https://climeworks.com/ https://skytree.eu/technology/
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
But just having DAC machines isn’t enough. We need new ideas and innovations on what to do with the CO2 once we have it. While CO2 can be stored in the ground there aren’t enough sites and maintaining it there is expensive. With carbon capture technologies finally viable, entrepreneurs that create storage solutions will be the real surprise headlines and become investment darlings. Food service companies can use CO2 (not just in carbonated beverages), it can be used to displace jet fuel, and there are already companies adding captured CO2 to cement. And given the opportunities, new ideas will emerge. 
 
 
Cultured Protein
 
Meat is a popular protein source in the U.S.. But meat has an outsized impact on the climate. Meat and dairy alone contribute over 14% of global greenhouse gas emissions, which is over half of all direct agriculture emissions (food production contributes about 25% of global emissions). For this and other reasons, many people are turning to meat alternatives.
 
2021 was the year of alternative plant-based meats.Impossible Burger and Beyond Meats were introduced to menus across the country, sit down and fast casual alike. We’ve got plant-based sausages, Swedish (meatless) meatballs, fried “fish” and more.  We can reduce consumption at the margin with efforts like meatless Mondays. But what about folks that haven’t, or don’t want, plant-based substitutes.
 
There’s another kind of meat alternative that is positioning itself to bridge that gap this year: cell-based or lab-grown cultured meat. This meat is made from real animal cells, but grown in a lab.  Israeli start-up Redefine Meat has pulled off the ‘world’s largest’ blind taste test for its 3D printed (yes, really 3D printed) meat alternative. The taste test targeted meat-eaters and the results are in. Over 90% of the tasters liked it. They aren’t here yet–but they are coming–and it is cool.
 
 
 
 
Other companies are jumping on the bandwagon. According to the NY Times – a number of companies are on the rise. Upside Foods opened a facility in California to grow cells into meat, Mosa Meat announced it made breakthroughs in their technology and Wildtype has developed a new, cell-based salmon product.
 
These aren’t ‘franken-fish’–those genetically modified salmon that we heard about a few years ago–they are still animals. By the end of 2022 the first 3D printed steaks, chicken, pork or seafood will begin the FDA approval process and could be on the market as soon as the end of the year or 2023. It will taste the same, cook the same, feel and smell the same, but without having to kill animals and with a smaller carbon footprint.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net Zero Energy Homes
 
America has a housing crisis. Current estimates are that the U.S. is short 4-5 million housing units, and the shortage is driving up housing prices. Prices are up almost 20% in 2021, the largest rise in the country’s history. And it isn’t just major cities that we hear about, Los Angeles, New York, Phoenix, etc., but it is happening in small cities and towns across the country. The main way to solve this is to build new housing units. The National Association of Realtors estimate that we need to build 2M housing units a year over the next decade. In 2021 about 1.2M housing units were completed and that has been the average over the past 5 years so we need to accelerate housing construction by 66% per year if we are going to ease the problem. That’s a big task and we need to build fast, cheap and safe. But we build buildings much the same way we have built them for decades. Same materials, same approach. Speeding up building will take new approaches and new technologies.
 
There are technologies that you will hear lots about in 2022 that can build these types of homes faster, cheaper and better than conventional stick-built homes. There are two main ways to build these new homes–using modular construction and 3D printing.
 
Modular construction has been around for decades, and while the technology wasn’t great in the early years, it has significantly improved and is set to accelerate in 2022. Many builders may be hesitant to change practices, but with increased demand for housing we are going to see more and more builders turn to practices that can build housing faster and cheaper. Modular construction–from apartment buildings to single family homes–can reduce the construction time in half and they cost about 30% less. The walls are built in factories–on an assembly line like cars are built–and then shipped to the site and assembled there. There is less waste, and each panel is structurally the same so there are few uncertainties and defects.
 
Companies like Vantem Global are expanding operations in the US with a focus on affordable, efficient housing using their unique approach and design for building panels. The company Factory OS has repurposed a Navy Shipyard machine shop near San Francisco to build panels for buildings in the housing-starved Bay Area. And IndieDwell, started in Idaho in 2016, is now producing modular homes in factories in Colorado and Virginia. There are others like them and more on the way. https://www.buildwithrise.com/stories/2021-prefabs-we-love
 
But I think the newest, cool technology for home building is 3D printed homes. Yeah, that’s right. But these aren’t the small 3D printers you can buy yourself. These are big machines that are brought to the site and the printer builds the home with space for windows, doors, wiring and ductwork. The company Icon is using a machine that can 3D print a 3000 sq ft home on site in 24 hours using locally sourced materials. Mighty Buildings is using 3D printing to build wall panels. And there are plenty others. https://all3dp.com/2/best-companies-building-3d-printed-houses/
  
All this building will have consequences, too. When you build a building, you are expecting it to last at least 50 years and most last significantly longer–so how housing is built has important consequences for the environment over the long-term. Roughly 20% of US energy-related greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions stem from heating, cooling, and powering households. If U.S. housing was a country, it would be the world’s 6th largest emitter of GHGs. So decisions on how housing is built today will have long lasting consequences. And it is not only the environment. The energy used to heat, cool and power homes come with a cost of course and energy prices will only continue to rise. Therefore, residents in housing units that are not built efficiently will be saddled with high and increasing operating costs. That is where building net-zero energy homes comes in.
 
 
 
Zero energy homes are homes that are built better. These aren’t ‘green homes’ or eco homes that make people think they need to live like hippies – the way that the popular video game Sims has their ‘eco pack’. These homes are super efficient, AI powered advanced design buildings, with technologies built in that help manage energy use in the home, that are well insulated and energy efficient, with solar panels and battery storage. Because they are built so well, they produce as much renewable energy (or more) than they use over the course of a year, leaving the occupants with a net-zero energy bill, and a carbon-free home.
 
 
Renewable Africa
 
Today over 760 million people in the world do not have access to electricity and while the total number overall has been declining (down from 1.2 billion in 2010), in Africa that number has been increasing since 2010 and many feel it has accelerated since the start of Covid. Today the unelectrified in sub-Saharan Africa is over 75% of the world’s total. When we think about our world today, and what is needed to improve quality of life, electricity is surely a requirement. For decades the world has been trying various means to increase electrification and for the most part until relatively recently it has been based on the classic model of building power plants and stringing power lines across long distances, basically expanding the electricity grid nationwide like we have in the U.S. As the slow progress of electrification indicates, that model has not really worked. Back in 1936 over 90% of U.S. farms and most rural areas were unelectrified and it was too expensive for the private sector to provide power. So the federal government stepped in and created the Rural Electrification Administration which subsidized the electrification of the nation. Today, however, most countries in Africa do not have the means to recreate something like that.
 
25 five years ago, many of us in the energy field were talking about decentralization of electric power. Rather than trying to build power lines across difficult landscapes that were expensive and time consuming, we were building models for bringing solar power to rural areas in the form of individual solar panels for households or microgrids that could connect up villages or small regions. The model was great, but the reality was that the technology wasn’t quite ready–solar was expensive, energy storage (batteries) was lacking, and the technology to manage small grids was relatively rudimentary. That has all changed today–solar is cheap, batteries are becoming more and more efficient and ‘grid-in-a-box’ is a thing. The idea is to bring all the elements of a large electrical system to a small scale, doing it cheaper and faster. There is an analogy–telephones.
 
For decades the issues of communication across countries in Africa was even less developed than electricity. Far fewer people had telephones and the wait time for installing a telephone line was years, and, just like electricity, it was expensive to string telephone lines across regional areas. That certainly hindered economic development. The introduction of cellphones changed that almost overnight, and the expansion of cellphones across the continent has been rapid. Today there are over 650 million mobile users across the continent. They effectively skipped over the traditional model, and the time is now to do that for electricity. And it has started–in 2019 almost 50 million people were connected to off-grid solar. However, we need more; some estimate at least 85 million connections per year for the next decade.
 
Investors are beginning to see opportunities that provide not only real returns but also direct benefits to the people and economic development. Organizations like https://africamda.org/ have grown and are supporting the further development. Investors are lining up to spend tens of billions of dollars and the number is increasing, some of it driven by support from multilateral organizations like the United Nations and the World Bank, some of it by the opportunities for carbon credits, but much of it is because it is a good business model. Certainly there are still many obstacles, one big one being that electricity service is often controlled by government-owned monopolies. That, however, has been changing, and we are seeing more and more opportunities emerge. Look for more companies and lots of cool technologies being deployed across Africa.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crypto, Blockchain and AI oh my
 
We’ve all been reading about the energy use and impact on climate change from the growth of cryptocurrencies, the explosion of NFTs and blockchain in general. Estimates are that Bitcoin itself consumes more electricity than the Netherlands per year?, and a single Bitcoin transaction uses the same amount of electricity an average American household uses over 70 days (and Americans use the most energy per household). Even while Ethereum is more efficient and only uses the equivalent of 8 days worth of electricity, that is still more electricity that the entire country of Belgium uses per year.
 
And it is not limited to just cryptocurrency transactions. The explosion of Non Fungible Tokens (NFTs) also requires a great deal of energy. In the simplest terms, NFTs transform digital works of art and other collectibles into one-of-a-kind, verifiable assets that are tradeable and verified on a blockchain. A blockchain is a data structure that makes it possible to create a digital ledger of data and share it among a network of independent parties. In the case of NFTs it is what guarantees that the digital art is the original. Think of sports memorabilia. You buy a baseball signed by Shohei Othani and it comes with a physical certificate that authenticates it. That is what a blockchain does, but digitally. The environmental issue with NFTS is that first, they are paid for in cryptocurrencies, and then one adds the energy use of the related transactions, blockchain verifications and use of the files themselves. This has some artists second guessing the implications of creating NFTs.
 
Then there are other uses of computers, the internet and the coming Web3. Take for example machine learning and deep learning. When companies today deploy artificial intelligence programs, they are most likely using machine learning–so much so that the terms are often used interchangeably, and sometimes ambiguously. Machine learning is a subfield of artificial intelligence that gives computers the ability to learn without explicitly being programmed. Deep learning takes it a bit further. Deep Learning is a subfield of machine learning concerned with algorithms inspired by the structure and function of the brain called artificial neural networks.
One study estimated that training a single deep learning model can emit C02 roughly equal to the total lifetime carbon footprint of five cars. Multiply that by the increasing amount of machine and learning models being run–that can easily grow into the millions, and you see the problem.
Machine learning is used for lots of applications many don’t realize. Yes it is used for scientific study or estimating the impact of global warming or finding planets or medical diagnoses or helping farmers farm better. But it is also found in everyday life like:
●  	Traffic alerts, Google Maps, Waze, Transit and other apps
●  	Social media applications like ranking posts
●  	Searching for product recommendations or best answers to questions
●  	Using points in your favorite shops
●  	Fraud detection
●  	Determining credit worthiness
●  	Google Translate
●  	Spam and malware
●  	Patient sickness predictions
●  	Targeting emails
 
All these things take machine learning and computational power. And Web3, the next generation of the internet, is expected to need even more computational power. That means more energy use and carbon emissions. So what do we do? It affects everyday life.
 
We first need to hold these entities responsible and create dynamic Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) metrics to assess how they are doing, make them recognize the impacts and, if need be, shame them into finding ways to reduce the negative impacts.
 
Then we can make sure power used in data centers are NEW clean energy sources. Some new data centers are claiming they are buying renewable energy. But if they are buying existing renewable energy – then whoever was using that power before – is now using fossil fuels and that doesn’t count. It only counts if they purposely build renewables for that application, and it doesn’t take away installations that were already going to be built.
 
And we need to make data centers more energy efficient. Technologies and practices are emerging to reduce energy consumption–making the buildings smarter, using better building techniques –and we need to also consider the location of the centers. Building data centers in the middle of the desert, like the Phoenix metropolitan area, may not be the best idea.
 
Finally, and what will be really exciting in 2022, is looking out for emerging technologies and practices that make the mining of coins, the use of blockchain and computational power for AI more efficient. There will be new protocols for crypto (I am not holding out hope for Proof of Stake because Ethereum keeps delaying its launch, but others will emerge), there will be new efficient ways to operate on a blockchain and ways to utilize computation more efficiently by eliminating computational waste. Look for new unicorns to emerge that will uproot the domination of existing players, and force them to change.
 
 
There’s only one spaceship earth, and your mission as a player and participant is to save it. That’s the goal and mandate of Earthshot™, a non-profit which was founded to inspire people to take an active role in combatting climate change through video games and compelling immersive experiences offering a powerful, positive, cleantech message. 
 
Almost half the country doesn’t believe that climate change will impact them, and we know that messaging based on fear and urgency is not working. We can tap into a sense of excitement about the future by showing off existing and emerging clean technologies because Cleantech is Cool. We are looking for collaborators, sponsors, and partners to help us achieve these goals. One strategy we have is to work with partners to develop new games and we have created two initial game concepts.
 
Electro Venture is a car-based adventure game. To get players excited about electric vehicles. A young ambitious Prof has invented a cheap and long-lasting battery. Industrial and other enemies have come to kidnap the Prof and destroy the prototype. You are their grad student and in your old broken-down vehicle, you need to get both to a factory in LA before the bad guys catch you. To keep ahead of the bad guys you need to upgrade with cool EV tech along the way. Players can explore places, gain vehicle attributes, and overcome obstacles while experiencing the thrill of racing. Electric vehicles do many things that gas powered cars can't. For example, gasoline powered cars can’t do what James Bond cars do in the movies, but an electric car can be outfitted with all that tech and do it in real life.
 
The World’s First Chef is a role-playing life simulation game to get people excited about sustainable food. In the game you can explore social interactions among multiple playing and non-playing characters akin to Animal Crossing and Stardew Valley. An aspiring chef, you are magically transported back in time with your dog to a community of undernourished hunters and gatherers. You need to forage for food and keep the community healthy. Among other activities, you can interact and build relationships with the community, use skill trees to enhance your capability to incorporate new ingredients, cooking and preservation techniques. Your trusty dog can help sniff out some foods (truffles!) and assist you in hunting and protecting the community. Learn to select and cultivate plants as the game proceeds and help the community settle into a village.
 
Another strategy is to embed cleantech into existing franchises. Not only adding electric vehicles to racing games but include the cool stuff EV’s can do that regular cars can’t – the EV Hummer crabwalk or the Rivian tank turn for example; adding electgric planes to flight simulators; cleantech into city building games making the coolest super-efficient, solar-powered AI managed house; or adding clean energy technologies to shooter and war games. In Afghanistan the U.S. army began to use portable solar/battery systems in place of diesel generators in some forward positions. They did this to reduce the need to maintain supply lines for fuel – but also because solar and batteries are silent. One could add these types of cleantech to war game scenarios.
Back in the twentieth century, we were in a race to reach the moon. Today, we are in a race to inspire a new generation of dreamers, inventors, entrepreneurs, gamers and everyone else to help save Spaceship Earth. Join us.
SuperCharged
One Sentence Summary:
SuperCharged is a 12-issue comic cross-country adventure, murder mystery and romance that showcases exciting electric vehicle technologies.
Slightly Longer Summary:
Join Cara Quintana and Jack Wilson as they race across the country to protect Cara’s super-battery invention from the hands of their mysterious enemy! Our story begins when Cara’s colleague, Dr. Liu, calls to warn Cara of a deadly threat and to set her on a quest. Rushing to the lab, Cara discovers Dr. Liu dead! Cara must get the battery prototype from Boston to LA to complete production of their invention before it’s stolen or destroyed! A New York City kid, Cara doesn’t have a license or a car. Thankfully, fate puts Jack, a young Kentucky farmer, and his beloved red pickup, Ruby, in Cara’s path. They enlist the help of Cara’s childhood friend, automotive guru Samantha (Sam), to install Cara’s battery in Jack’s truck – supercharging Ruby! Along the way, Sam (through video calls and later through “augmented reality” from the vehicle dashboard) guides them through high-tech updates to Ruby, helping them evade pursuers real and imagined, including foreign agents, rogue military contractors, tech competitors and others.
Cara and Jack may start as strangers from starkly different backgrounds – but nothing brings people together like facing life-and-death challenges and being stuck in a car together all the way across the country. But it’s not all enemies and car chases! Along the road, Cara and Jack seek out their favorite foods (donuts for Cara and BBQ for Jack), meet interesting characters, enjoy popular country music, and discover that while hours spent alone in a car together might drive two people apart…it might also drive them together. So hop on in as Ruby takes us for an action-packed, high-octane, super-tech adventure series with elements of mystery and romance!
Specifications:
 
Target Audience        	ages 15-35
Length                      	10-12 issues at 20-24 pages each for an approximate total of 250 pages.
Other Elements         	Each issue will include local restaurant profiles and an “EV Tech Talk” section, together not exceeding a page.  Each issue will profile a popular country song.  (Permissions to be sought, as appropriate).
Mode of publication  	Open for discussion, but considering electronic distribution of each comic issue when ready for release, with hard and paper publication upon completion of the full story.
Story by                    	Sally Krueger-Wyman and Bob Wyman
Illustration by           	Jim and Ruth Keegan, Mark Schultz
 

Swapping Out Old AC Units: One Piece of a Robust Energy Solution for California
California faces overlapping energy and environmental challenges: climate change, extreme heat, strain on the electric grid, spiking natural gas prices, and the burden higher energy prices place on California’s most vulnerable communities. In the past year, these challenges have intensified in the form of record high temperatures last summer and soaring natural gas prices early in 2023. The State has developed several innovative tools for addressing these challenges, but one tool that still does not receive enough attention is energy efficiency.
In a forthcoming white paper, we propose that an efficiency program swapping out old window air conditioners (AC) for new ones would meaningfully reduce energy demand, strain on the grid, and energy burden, and that such a program would serve as a model for other efficiency programs. For the counties covered by Southern California Edison and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, replacing a quarter of a million window AC units the program could save up to 100 gWh and $26 million per year and displace 60 MW of natural gas generation running at 20% capacity, which is significantly cheaper than the cost of peak power.
Energy use is already on many Californians’ minds. Southern California Gas and San Diego Gas and Electric issued warnings in early January 2023 that most customers’ natural gas costs would double that month, and that warning turned out to be an underestimate. The price spike was the result of not just supply constraints and colder than average temperatures but also reduced natural gas inventories. The natural gas system is not built to deliver peak winter volumes on-demand during the winter months but rather relies on natural gas storage. Traditionally, utilities store excess natural gas in the spring and summer, but this past summer, due to higher-than-expected electricity demand driven by extreme heat, utilities ran natural gas plants more than expected, reducing the gas in inventory, and contributing to the recent price increases.
Last summer, during those heat waves, concerns of rolling blackouts due to high demand loomed large. Ultimately, California avoided capacity shortage blackouts, but it was a near miss. The State responded with an approach that depends too heavily on supply-side strategies (devoting billions in the 2022 budget to natural gas-fired generation to increase electricity supply) without sufficiently exploiting significant demand-reduction opportunities. 
Around the same time, the California Air Resources Board finalized its 2022 Climate Change Scoping Plan, which sets the framework for getting California to net-zero carbon emissions. There is much to commend in the plan; however, it can be improved. Greater priority placed on energy efficiency would further reduce the need for gas-fired generation and, thus, more quickly meet the plan’s net-zero goals.
Even without the price spikes, there is increasing recognition of the considerable energy burden experienced by California’s lower-income residents. Energy burden is measured as the percent of annual income a household needs to spend on energy. Poor households in Los Angeles County (those at 30% or less of the median annual income) pay about 11% of their income on energy, while households at or above the median annual income pay only about 1%. These numbers likely understate the burden because many poorer households have fewer energy-using devices, including air conditioning, or use those devices less frequently to avoid the cost. If these households used the energy necessary to get a similar comfort level as higher-income households, the burden would be even higher. Additionally, low- and moderate-income households often have older, less-efficient equipment that provides lower quality output but still uses more energy, further raising costs for those households.
Finally, rising temperatures driven by climate change will continue to increase vulnerable communities’ risk of heat exposure, causing more heat-related illnesses and deaths. In recent years, extreme heat, exacerbated by climate change, has increasingly threatened public health with many California residents missing work or school, being hospitalized, or even dying from the impacts of extreme heat.  A recent University of Southern California study estimated a 6% increased risk of death on extreme heat days, and the number of those days will only increase.
While several strategies could address these overlapping challenges, the budget and scoping plan should accelerate one of the most cost-effective and best ways to reduce the risk of blackouts, reduce natural gas price pressures, meet the State’s climate goals, and build resilience in vulnerable populations: increased investment in energy efficiency. Even with the State’s advanced building codes, most California buildings, especially in lower-income communities, still have older and inefficient equipment, including window air conditioners.
Residents in areas with higher poverty rates who are fortunate enough to have air conditioning are frequently saddled with older, less-efficient units, that are often poorly installed (and therefore cool even less efficiently). Despite spending hundreds of dollars on monthly energy bills, residents struggle to cool their homes and apartments. Many low- and moderate-income residents face a difficult tradeoff between enduring extreme heat without turning on air conditioning or incurring high utility bills.
Our forthcoming white paper will assess the benefits and describe an air conditioning swap-out program targeting low- and moderate-income households. The program would assist these households with swapping out older, more energy-intensive units that provide relatively poor cooling performance with new, more energy-efficient units that deliver better cooling, thereby reducing electricity demand particularly during peak times. The program would also install new units properly, reducing leaks and inefficiencies. In 2001, the Natural Resources Defense Council proposed a similar program.  It is past time to implement this program.
The political tailwinds in California indicate that the time is ripe for implementation of the proposed AC Swap Program.  The California Energy Commission (CEC) is currently working on developing strategies for a similar direct installation program based on recently passed legislation. That program would provide new equipment for lower-income communities. Our forthcoming white paper will encourage an acceleration and expansion of the CEC program as well as the inclusion of the AC Swap Program in its implementation.
The AC Swap Program would benefit residents who are at high risk from extreme heat, reduce electricity costs, reduce energy demand (and, in turn, the burden on the state’s electricity grid during peak hours), all while supporting the State’s ambitious climate change goals. This program would also advance the State’s environmental justice goals as many of the communities most affected by heat exposure also face other environmental burdens such as pollution and lack of access to green spaces. We estimate that the program would create significant cost savings for residents.
Using available CEC data, we have made preliminary estimates about the scope of the cost savings. In the counties serviced by Southern California Edison and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, we estimate that there are more than 250,000 room AC units that are 9 years old and older. We assume that a new, properly-installed AC unit would operate up to 50% more efficiently than these existing units. Based on estimates of how much electricity the existing units consume, the program could save up to 100 million kWh and over $26 million per year. Individual customers would save over $100 per year on electricity. If we assume that a typical AC unit is operated for about 1600 hours a year in Southern California (with a substantial portion of those hours concentrated during peak times when families are home from work and school), the electricity savings from the swap-out program could be equivalent to taking offline a 60 MW natural gas power plant operating at 20% capacity. This would relieve a significant amount of the State’s summertime peak capacity pressure and would also reduce summertime demand for natural gas, leaving more in storage for winter demand.
Economies of scale would make a swap-out program cost effective. As a one-off example, if the program purchased an AC unit from a retailer and hired a contractor to install that unit, it would cost about $700. If the unit lasts 10 years, then the cost of the program is about $0.17/kWh. In comparison, during the September 2022 heatwave the cost of peak power reached $0.50/kWh. At scale, utilities could purchase and install units for significantly less.
With appropriate ratemaking, rate-of-return approvals, and direction from the State’s governing commissions, some utilities could provide the capital for the full cost and installation of new AC units for their eligible customers who currently have older, less-efficient units. Perhaps privately-owned utilities could be allowed to earn a higher rate of return on investments in this program to encourage their participation, while protecting eligible households from rate hikes. The swap would be more effective than a rebate program, which requires initial upfront costs to be paid by program participants and often requires higher administrative costs.
As an aside, to enhance the benefits of this program, perhaps the State should examine the impacts of encouraging manufacturers to assemble AC units in California through tax benefits, expedited permitting processes, and guaranteed procurement of AC units.
The AC Swap Program offers a cost-effective approach to decrease the risks of blackouts and natural gas price spikes while reducing greenhouse gas emissions, improving public health, and lowering energy costs to consumers.
The structure of the program and its potential benefits will be further detailed in our forthcoming white paper.
Bio:
Mark Bernstein is Cofounder and President of Earthshot, a 501c3 non-profit inspiring climate action with over 25 years of experience pioneering innovative energy, environmental and sustainability solutions across academic, private, public and non-profit sectors.

Most crises are in fact opportunities.  In addressing the state’s electricity shortfall risks, the Governor’s California budget misses a huge opportunity. The budget includes billions to extend the life of some natural gas power plants, build new ones and even invest in some emergency diesel generation. That is not the best, cheapest, or fastest way to reduce the risk of blackouts due to ‘high’ demand caused by increasing temperatures driven by climate change. The answer is to avoid the high demand altogether and bring forward a better solution. While CA has led the nation in energy efficiency, the fact is, most buildings in the state still have older and inefficient energy-using equipment – especially in lower-income communities and small commercial businesses.
 
Small commercial buildings make up 94% of all commercial buildings in the U.S but are largely underserved by efficiency programs. In a recent report, ACEEE stated that comprehensive retrofits of commercial buildings could achieve up to a 40% reduction in energy consumption. We don’t need anywhere near that impressive number to solve our near-term challenge – easy changes can reduce energy demand by 10-15% quicker and cheaper than any of the energy supply side (fossil fuel) options. These include lighting retrofits and the installation of new sensors and building energy management systems, and even sealing ductwork so cooling and heating are not wasted. Add in some strategically-placed solar and battery systems and you have solved the bulk of the problem.  A state strategic energy-efficiency upgrade is the answer.
 
It is not just commercial buildings that can help solve the problem. Lower-income households receive low-quality energy services. They tend to live in older buildings with little or poor insulation, air leaks around doors and windows, cracked walls or roofs, and older and more inefficient air conditioners and other equipment. A 20-year-old air conditioner, hardly uncommon, uses at least 4 times more energy than a new one and doesn’t cool as well either. On a hot day, these residents spend lots of money on electricity yet still have a hard time living in comfortable conditions. Running an inefficient air-conditioner on a hundred-plus-degree day, they may find it hard to get the indoor temperature below 85 degrees. This has wide-ranging consequences. The elderly are particularly vulnerable to these conditions, while children often suffer from asthma, particularly if they lack a stable temperature and proper ventilation. Underserved vulnerable individuals often end up in emergency rooms, missing school or work days.
 
Overall, insufficient household energy has been linked to excess deaths in summer; cardiovascular, pulmonary, and respiratory problems; poor sleep, anxiety, depression, and stress. The City of Los Angeles has recognized the problem by creating a new position: Chief Heat Officer whose job is to help find ways to reduce the heat burden on the communities that are most vulnerable. Numerous health and environmental studies confirm the material net economic and social benefits of addressing these problems.
 
Rather than spending a billion dollars on new natural gas-generating equipment, let’s use it to replace older air conditioners with new ones, seal up windows and improve insulation, and replace old light bulbs with new LEDs for every household in California that needs it. And if we want electric utilities to do it too - how about we let them earn a rate of return on replacing millions of inefficient air conditioners - instead of earning a return on building new power plants. The benefits would be enormous. Will this solve the problem? You bet it will, we can shave 10-20% off existing energy demand and prevent blackouts.
 
I recognize that ramping up quickly will cause some supply headaches – we all know about the supply chain issues we have all been facing. However, there are plenty of LED lights and new air conditioners available now to get started. While we are getting started– if the state is planning to buy a large number of air conditioners, we can provide a tax break to any air conditioner manufacturer willing to set up shop in California and guarantee purchases at a negotiated volume and price for a fixed time period while expediting permitting processes and creating new jobs.
 
If you want to see hundreds of cool and innovative technologies that can be used to help achieve these savings – check out Earthshot’s Cleantech is Cool Portal for Building Solutions.
